Every website can be split up into two
parts, the front end and the backend.
The front end is all the visual stuff
you see on the webpage and the backend is
what saves and manages your data. For
example, if you are on amazon.com,
the backend would store your
order history, your profile.
It would load search results
and much more. In this video,
we're going to take a look
at the technologies that
are used in the backend of a
website and in another video we
explore the front end technologies.
As an example, let's say that we're
on amazon.com and we do some shopping,
and now we're ready to make an order.
When I click place order, what happens,
we're going to start from the ground up.
Any computer that's
connected to the internet,
including your computer and my computer,
can send a message across the internet
to another computer that's also connected
to the internet.
So to simplify things,
Amazon has a computer in their
office building somewhere,
and our computer is going to send a
message continuing our order to that
Amazon computer. In this scenario,
the computer that is sending the
message is called the client,
and the computer that is receiving
the message is called the server.
But before this happens, computers,
they can't receive messages
from the internet by default.
We have to program them to be able
to receive messages. To do that,
we need a backend programming language.
Almost every programming language has
a feature that turns a computer into a
server and allows it to receive messages.
Popular backend programming languages
are JavaScript, sometimes called node js,
Python, Ruby, and Java. However,
using a backend programming language by
itself is actually really difficult and
requires a huge amount of code.
So there are two tools that we use to
help with this. A backend framework and a
package manager,
a backend framework helps us create a
server much easier and with a lot less
code.
Each backend programming language has a
few different frameworks to choose from,
but the most popular ones are
Express JS for JavaScript, Python,
Django, Rubion Rails, and
Java Spring. In the backend,
we also use a lot of code that other
people have written called packages to do
common tasks like doing
calculations, talking to a database,
and setting up user
login and authentication.
We typically use a lot of
packages in our backend,
and in order to install and
manage all these packages,
we use something called a package manager.
Each language has its own package manager.
The most popular ones are NPM
for JavaScript, PIP for Python,
bundler for Ruby, and Maven for Java.
These are all the technologies we
need to create our backend server.
The next problem we have is
we need somewhere to save
the data for our website.
Going back to our Amazon example,
data could mean our user data,
like the login information,
order, history,
as well as data for all the products
that are being sold on Amazon,
the descriptions, the ratings, and the.
Reviews. To do this, we use a database.
A database helps us store and manage data.
It's just a piece of software that
usually runs on a different computer,
and we have to do some setups so that
our backend can communicate with the
database. The most popular
databases are MySQL, Postgres,
and MongoDB. All right, so
if you're just starting out,
this is basically all
you need for the backend.
You can build most of your projects
with just a server and a database.
For example, here's how our
Amazon scenario could work.
When the customer places
an order in the front end,
the front end sends a message
containing the order to the backend.
The backend then saves the order to a
database and sends back a message to the
front end confirming that
the order was created.
The message that the front end sends
to the backend is known as a request,
and the message that the backend sends
back is known as a response. This is
called a request response cycle,
and this is generally how web
applications work. Here's another example.
Let's say that you're
in the Amazon warehouse.
The warehouse might have a different
front end that sends a request to the
backend to get our order.
The backend then gets our order from
the database and sends it back to the
warehouse front end, and then they
go ahead and prepare our order.
Now that we've seen the overall flow,
we're going to dive deeper and take
a look at what's inside a request.
Here's a simplified example of a
request to create an Amazon order.
If we read over it, we can see that
it's actually really easy to understand.
We have the items that we ordered,
the quantities and some other information
about our Amazon order. At the top,
we have the type of the
request, the domain name,
and the URL path. This describes where
this request is going and what type of
request This is. First of all, Amazon.
The company has bought the
domain name amazon.com,
and they configured it so that any
request going to amazon.com will be
redirected to that server
in their office building.
So that's why we're sending
this request to amazon.com.
The type and the URL path. Identify
what kind of request this is.
So in this example, this is a post
request to slash orders. In the backend,
we use our programming language and
backend framework to define what types of
requests are allowed and how we should
handle these requests. For example,
we can allow a post slash orders request,
and whenever we get a
post slash orders request,
we will create an order using our
programming language and save it to our
database. We can also allow a get
slash order request, and in this case,
we will retrieve the order history
from the database and send it back as a
response. Another example is a delete
slash order request where we will cancel
the order.
So this list of all the different types
of requests that the backend allows is
called an a API application
programming interface.
The API is one of the most important
concepts in backend programming.
If you send a request that
is not allowed by the api,
the backend will respond with an error.
So we mentioned earlier that we can
identify requests using a type and a URL
path. There are several types we
can choose from, such as post get,
put and delete, and the URL
path can be anything we want.
So why in this example do
we choose post slash orders?
This is just a naming
convention for our requests,
and this naming convention is called
rest representational state transfer.
In rest, the type of the
request has a special meaning.
So post means to create
something, and in this case,
post slash orders means to create an
order, get means to get something,
and delete means to delete something
and so on. An API that uses the
REST naming convention
is called a REST api.
REST is the most common convention
that we use for our APIs,
but there are several other
conventions that we could use.
One of them is called GraphQL,
which uses Post slash GraphQL
for all of our requests,
and another one is called rpc,
which uses post and a
more detailed D URL path,
like post slash create order or
post slash get order history.
So that is what a request is when
an API is and what rest means. Now,
let's talk about infrastructure nowadays.
Instead of company's purchasing their
own computers to run their websites,
they rent computers from
a cloud computing company.
The biggest cloud computing companies
are aws, Amazon Web Services,
gcp, Google Cloud platform,
and Microsoft Azure.
The basic idea of cloud computing is
you're renting a bunch of computers.
This is also known as IAS infrastructure
as a service. Behind the scenes,
AWS has a giant powerful
computer, and inside its software,
it's running many smaller computers,
and we're actually renting one
of these smaller computers,
and these smaller computers
only exist in these software,
so we call them virtual machines
or VMs. So to run our website,
we rent a VM from AWS to run our backend,
and we also rent another
VM to run our database.
Another problem we have to solve is
what if our website gets really popular
during the holiday season and we start
getting a lot of requests and internet
traffic that our server can't
handle. With cloud computing,
we can set up multiple VMs running these
same backend code and then set up a
special VM in front of these
called a load balancer,
and the load balancer will distribute
requests evenly across our VMs.
Once a holiday season is over,
we can just shut off our VMs when we
don't need them. This is a lot easier than
having to buy physical computers
where if the holiday season is over,
you still have the physical
computers that you paid for,
but we still have another problem.
We now have a lot of VMs that
we need to create and set up,
and it takes a lot of time and effort.
Cloud computing companies offer another
service called a PAs a platform As a
service, a PAs just lets
us upload our backend code.
It will set up all the VMs
including the load balancer,
and integrate everything for us.
The three most popular paths are
Elastic Beanstalk for AWS App Engine for
GCP and App Service for Microsoft Azure.
The next concept we're going
to look at is microservices.
For our Amazon example,
let's say that our backend contains code
that saves an order to the database,
charges the user's credit card,
and sends an email confirmation.
In the real world,
this backend can be
millions of lines of code.
So we split this up into three code bases.
Then each of these code bases
will have their own backend,
each with the load balancer and
sometimes their own database.
Then when we need to send an email,
our orders backend will send a
request to the email backend,
which will send the email.
So splitting up our backend into
separate backends like this is called
microservices, and it helps keep our
code base smaller and more focused.
Each microservice does not have to
use the same programming language and
database.
One microservice can be using JavaScript
and MongoDB while another microservice
can be using Python and MySQL.
Now, to make this even easier,
there are companies out there like
Twilio who have already created an email
service.
So Twilio provides a backend and an API
for sending emails. So instead of us
creating our own email microservice,
our backend can just send
requests to Twilio's backend.
When a company provides a backend and an
API that outside applications can use,
this is called a SaaS,
software as a service.
Pretty much everything you do in
the backend that's complicated.
This probably a SaaS company out there
that already provides that service,
and you can just use that service instead
of building your own microservice.
So these three concepts we just looked
at, infrastructure as a service,
platforms as a service,
and software as a service are the
three foundations of cloud computing.
These days,
most companies use cloud computing to run
the backend for their websites instead
of buying and managing physical servers
themselves. In this last section,
I want to introduce some additional
technologies you might see in the backend.
Previously, we mentioned the
databases, MySQL, Postgres,
and MongoDB. These are sometimes called
primary databases because they're the
main database that our
website uses. Generally,
we start our backend with a server and
a primary database and then bring in
these additional
technologies if we need to,
if we allow our users to upload images.
A primary database is not
good for storing images,
so we would use a blob store like aws, s3,
and a CDN like CloudFront to store
and load user uploaded images
if we want to allow text search.
Primary databases are
very slow at text search,
so we would bring in a search
database like Elastic Search.
If our website is getting a lot of traffic
and we need to take some stress off
our primary database, we would add a
cache like Redis to improve performance.
If.
We want to do data science,
we don't want to do the data
analysis using our primary database.
It's busy running our website.
So we would copy all of our data into
an analytical database like Snowflake,
which is really good for doing
data science on the side.
If you want to schedule a
task for later. For example,
Amazon might want to email their users
before their Amazon Prime subscription
renews.
We would use a job queue like Rabbit MQ
to schedule this task for the future,
and there's a bunch more technologies
like these out there that are made to
solve specific problems.
So these are all the backend technologies
that we covered in this video.
If you're just starting out,
you mostly just need to know
how to use cloud computing,
a backend framework in a primary database.
These other technologies are
things that you may or may not use.
You would add them to your backend
depending on what kind of website and
features you're trying to
make. Thanks for watching.
My name is Simon from Super simple.dev.
I want to make a tech
career possible for anyone.
If you have any questions or comments,
please leave them down below and
I'll see you in the next one.